## scRNA-seq + FISH as a case study for spatial transcriptomics

### Overview and biological question  

Single cells are considered the smallest units and building blocks of each tissue, but they still require proper spatial and structural three-dimensional organization in order to assemble into a functional tissue that can exert its physiological function.
In addition, most tissues are composed of multiple cell types whose identity and function can be inferred through their unique transcriptomic profile.
In the last decade single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) played a key role to capture single cell gene expression profiles, which allowed us to map virtually all the different cell types and states in whole organisms.
Despite this remarkable achievement this technology is based on cellular dissociation and hence does not maintain spatial relationships between single cells.

More recently technologies have begun to emerge that can profile the transcriptome of single cells within their original environment.
These technological advancements offer the possibility to examine how gene expression is influenced by cell-to-cell interactions or organized in a spatially coherent manner.
One such approach is sequential single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (seqFISH), which can identify single molecules at (sub)cellular resolution with high sensitivity.
Nevertheless, and in contrast with scRNAseq, seqFISH and many other spatial transcriptomic technologies often pose significant technological challenges and hence the number of profiled genes per cell is usually restricted to a smaller number (10-100s).

To overcome the lack of spatial information with scRNAseq and the common limited coverage in spatial datasets, we sought to combine and integrate a matching scRNAseq and seqFISH dataset, since both were generated from the mouse visual cortex region.
More specifically, in this hackathon we explored a number of strategies to identify the most likely cell types in the seqfish dataset based on information obtained from the scRNAseq dataset.
And in the opposite direction, we sought out how to transfer spatial information obtained from the seqfish dataset to that of the scRNAseq dataset.


![Overview of analysis. **A** **Caption missing, Alex**
**B** **Caption missing, Amrit**
**C** **Caption missing, Josh**
**D** **Caption missing, Hang**
.](images/seqFish_mockup.png){#fig:spatial}


### Computational challenges

#### Challenge 1: overlay of scRNA-seq onto seqFISH for resolution enhancement

**[suggestion 1]**  
Sequencing and imaging based single-cell transcriptomic profiling have complementary strengths.
Whereas single-cell RNAseq generates transcriptome-wide information, it does not have spatial information.
On the other hand, seqFISH (Lubeck 2014; Shah 2016) provides single-cell resolution spatial information, but typically profiles the expression level of only 100-300 genes.
Although the newer generation of seqFISH technology (called seqFISH+) has greatly enhanced its capacity which can now be used to profile 10,000 genes (Eng 2019), the technology is significantly more complex and costly.
As such, it is desirable to develop computational approaches to effectively integrate scRNAseq and seqFISH data analyses.

In this hackathon, the participants were provided with seqFISH (Zhu 2018) and scRNAseq (Tasic 2016) data corresponding to the mouse visual cortex and challenged to accurately identify cell-types by integrating both datasets.
Cell type labels, derived from scRNAseq analysis (Tasic 2016) and previous seqFISH/scRNAseq integration (Zhu 2018) were also provided as reference.
A variety of computational approaches were applied to achieve this goal, including: supervised classification with support vector machines (Coullomb, Xu), semi-supervised self-training (Singh), and unsupervised matrix factorization methods (Sodicoff) (Figure {@fig:spatial}).
While the methodologies are different, a number of themes recur, such as the importance of gene selection and batch effect correction.
As expected, the ability to identify refined cell-type structure relies on the selection of cell-type specific marker genes in seqFISH data, suggesting a potential benefit of using single-cell RNAseq data to guide seqFISH experimental design.
Batch effect is another important factor affecting the accuracy of data integration.
While a number of batch effect correction methods have been developed (COMBAT, Seurat, Scanorama, etc), it remains challenging to distinguish technical from biological variations if the biological samples do not match exactly.


**[suggestion 2]**  
The mouse visual cortex consists of multiple complex cell types, however the number of profiled genes in the seqFISH dataset is limited to 125 genes.
Moreover, these genes were not prioritized based on their ability to discriminate between cell types and thus assigning the correct cell identity is challenging.
In contrast the scRNAseq dataset is transcriptome wide, thus including the 125 aforementioned genes.
As such we first used all genes to identify the cell type labels for each cell in the scRNAseq data with high certainty.
Next, we leveraged that information to build a classifier based on (a subset of) the 125 common genes only.
This classifier could subsequently be applied to the seqFISH dataset in order to assign cell types to each cell with high probability.

During the hackathon we tested various machine learning or data integration models, but also noted that initial dataset normalization strategies might have a significant impact on the final results (see common challenges @Amrith).
Although unique molecular identifier (UMI) based scRNAseq and seqFISH can both be considered as count data, we observed dataset specific biases that could be attributed to either platform (imaging vs sequencing) or sample specific sources of variation.
Here we opted to apply a quantile normalization approach which forces a similar expression distribution for each shared gene.

The hackathon participants selected two machine learning classifiers, a supervised support vector machine (SVM) and a semi-supervised lasso and elastic-net regularized generalized linear model (glmnet).
To further improve the SVM model the participants tried multiple kernels and searched for optimal hyperparameters using a combined randomized and zoomed search.
In addition, different flavors of recursive feature elimination was used to find the optimal or minimum number of genes needed to correctly classify the majority of the cells.
Importantly, participants tested different classification accuracy metrics to alleviate the major class imbalance in the dataset, since more than 90% of cells were excitatory or inhibitory neurons.
The glmnet approach used a iterative model building approach, which combines both datasets and initially only retains the highest confidence labels and then gradually adds more cell type labels until all cells have been classified.
This type of self training approach might in fact be more generalizable to other datasets.

Finally, a data integration approach based on integrative non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) was used by applying the previously published LIGER approach.
By integrating both datasets in a similar subspace based on shared factors, cell type labels can be transferred using a nearest neighbor approach.



#### Challenge 2: determine signatures of cellular co-localization or spatial coordinates in non-spatial scRNA-seq

**[suggestion 1]**  
How could one identify spatial patterns in the seqFISH data? This broad question can be divided into a number of specific tasks, such as detecting genes whose expression is spatially coherent, cell types whose spatial distribution is confined to distinct regions, recurrent multi-cell-type interaction clusters, etc, and the spatial scale may vary from subcellular all the way to tissue-wide organizations.
While there have been abundant studies in the geo-spatial analysis domain, computational tools targeting specific spatial transcriptomic questions are still lacking.
In this hackathon, one group tackled this challenge by aggregating gene expression data from neighboring cells followed by spatial clustering (Coullomb).
Much more work in the future is need to further explore such information.


**[suggestion 2]**  
Most analyses that were originally developed for scRNAseq data can be immediately applied to spatial transcriptomic datasets, however methods to extract sources of variation that originate from spatial factors are still sparse.
To incorporate spatial information the cells from the seqFISH dataset were first connected through a spatial network based on Voronoi tessellation and then the expression of each individual cell was spatially smoothed by calculating the average gene expression levels over all the neighboring cells.
This smoothened and aggregated data matrix was subsequently used to create a 2 dimensional UMAP from which clusters were identified through a density based clustering approach.
The obtained cluster labels can then be mapped back to the original spatial locations  for further visual inspection and analysis.


**[suggestion 2]**  
Most analyses that were originally developed for scRNAseq data can be immediately applied to spatial transcriptomic datasets, however methods to extract sources of variation that originate from spatial factors are still sparse.
In order to take into account both gene expression data and spatial information, the cells from the seqFISH dataset were first connected through a spatial network based on Voronoi tessellation.
Then, for each node, its RNA count data was aggregated with its first order neighbors' count data.
The mean and standard deviation were computed for each gene in the gathered data in order to capture the global tendency as well as the variability in the area arround each node.
Thus, each node has `nb_genes x nb_statistics (here 2)` variables.
These "aggregation statistics" can be visualized on a 2D UMAP projection.
These data were clustered in UMAP reduced spaces of dimensionality between 2 and 9, higher dimensions allowing to define more fine-grained clusters.
The clustering was performed with HDBSCAN, a noise-aware density-based algorithm that can define arbitrary-shaped clusters.
These clusters can then be visualized on the 2D UMAP projection and on the 2D spatial map of seqFISH data.
The clusters are spatially coherent, some of them contain several cell types, and a given cell type is not necessarily limited to one specific cluster.
During the exploratory phase consisting in varying the number of dimensions and the minium cluster size, a specific spot area was found clustered for several parameters combinations, suggesting it wasn't an artifact of the choice of parameters.
"Differential expression" analysis was performed between this spot and the other areas, although we don't look at differences in gene data but in aggregation metrics.
This area seems to correspond to a "regeneration hub", but this analysis has to be considered carefully and further analyzes is required to confirm this hypothesis.
This "neighbors  aggregation" method has been extended to aggregate RNA counts (or other node attributes) to higher orders of neighbors in order to define aggregation metrics on wider areas, which could be useful for analyzes of bigger tissues.
One interesting extension would be to substract phenotypes contributions to RNA counts for each cell before performing the neighbors aggregation analysis in order to highlight genes that are modulated by spatial factors.
But if we want to retrieve the mean expression of a cluster for cells belonging to it, we should first check cluster's convexity and be sure that no other cluster lies within it.
