## Commonalities between analytical multi-omics approaches for hackathons

Although the hackathon studies each utilize data from different measurement technologies to highlight disparate challenges to multi-omics, they are unified by the underlying problem of data integration. We summarize the common main challenges faced across all hackathons and the resulting common approaches the participants adopted  to highlight the critical computational challenges for multi-omics single cell data analysis. Largely, the choice of methods that were study-specific relied mostly on the challenge or biological question to address. For example, data integration was moslty addressed using projection approaches across all studies, whilst single cell spatial analysis required specific approaches based on Hidden Markov random field or Moran's Index (Figure {@fig:proteomics}B). Still, just as the comptuational methodologies span technologies so to do the central challenges highlighted in each hackathon. Most notably, the accuracy of the analysis depends critically on data pre-processing, variable selection, feature overlap, and imbalances of data size. Briefly, table {@tbl:common} summarizes the main methods that were applied across all hackathons. Common main challenges included the assessment of the effect of pre-processing steps (normalization, upstream feature selection), the lack of overlap between cells or features (Figure {@fig:common}), managing differences in scale across data sets, the application of generic approaches developed for bulk data and adapted for single cell data, study specific approaches for spatial analysis (sc spatial and sc proteomics studies) and the inclusion of additional information. A very large number of computational analysis methods that were applied derive from bulk RNA-seq literature, with the exception of projection methods such as tSNE, UMAP and LIGER (the latter two also based on the common techniques NMF and PCA that were further developed for single cell data). Each of these challenges must be fully solved to enable subsequent interpretation of multi-scale biological systems from multi-omics data.

<!--
 - **Table** describes method, foundation in the context of previous bulk and single cell literature, and technology dependence
    - Attempts to tweak existing methods and challenges associated in hackathons
    - List methods that are either technology dependent (e.g. spatial) vs universal and how to choose them
-->

**Elana - I wonder if it would flow better to first introduce the specific sections for challenges and then have a summary subsection of common analysis approaches with the table that would flow into interpretation. This ends somewhat abruptly as a transition to that next section as written.**

### Dependence on pre-processing method and/or variable selection
Pre-processing steps strongly affect downstream analyses. Our participants thoroughly assessed the effect of normalisation and data transformation (e.g. sc spatial, Figure {@fig:spatial}Letter), preliminary feature selection (mostly on based on highly variable genes) or feature summarization (scNMT-seq study). Comparisons between analyses were facilitated by providing processed input data (ref to software section), but such step was not sufficient to face reproducibility issues between the original published study and the new analyses. For example in the sc spatial study, Coullomb selected 19 genes (*in scRNA-seq? or seqFISH?*) whereas the original paper (incl ref) was based on 47 genes. No consensus was reached regarding what was the best way to process such emerging data, as no ground truth nor established biological results are yet available (ref: section benchmark).


### Approaches for partial overlap of information (cells / features)
Degree of overlap between datasets varied dramatically within each study. Intuitively, one requires at least one type of overlap (whether on the features, or on cells, Figure {@fig:common}) in order to integrate information across modalities. The field has made progress in developing methods to integrate data sets across the same (bulk) samples of single cells, mostly based on dimension reduction techniques. Amongst them, NMF (LIGER), Projection to Latent Structures (sGCCA) were used for the scNMT-seq study. When there was no cell overlap (sc spatial, sc proteomics), prediction methods were used to predict gene, protein or spatial expression values based on nearest neighbors, latent variables or optimal transpor, or to predict cell types (Hsu). The most challenging study was the sc proteomics, which raised the potential issue of no overlap between cells or features - the so called fourth corner that relies on phenotypes (ref sc proteomics section). We anticipate that this scenario will be avoided once technological progress and increase in data sets availability is achieved [@doi: 10.1186/s13059-020-1926-6].

**to do: add in table the overlap between cells (i.e. sc NMT-seq)**

<!--
- Overlap in each study
  - seqFish: same features but not cells; scProt: same proteins, not cells but similar patients; scNMT-seq: same cells but not features
  - How it was solved (Table)
- Anchoring information across datasets or studies is needed (Figure)
- Incorporation of existing biological knowledge
  - ‘From discovery to detection’ (Meuleman + debrief), time is ripe to include more knowledge in our data driven approaches
- Challenge: Partial cell overlap (but no features matching) and No overlap were not addressed
-->

### Managing differences in scale and size across datasets
**potentially move this section higher? and amend order in table** **Elana - agreed, this could read well as a second section.**

As all studies in our hackathon did not match either cells or features, different types of techniques were used to address the differences in scale or resolution across data sets. For sc spatial and sc proteomics, participants focused on a common set of genes (via feature selection in sc spatial) or proteins. The scNMT-seq study that included overlap between cells raised the issue of differences in data set size (e.g. number of features). Some projection-based methods can be limited in this setting (e.g. MOFA), requiring a similar number of features in each data set, whilst others such as PLS / sGCCA are not limited by such constraint and enabled flexible analysis (Abadi). Difference in data scale may result in one data set contributing to either too much variation or noise during data integration. techniques such as re-scaling (Jenagan), batch effect removal approaches, such as Combat [@doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037] (Singh), or weighting specific data sets (Arora, Abadi) were considered and all offer further improvement in the analyses.


![Figure caption: **figure will be updated**
A) scSpatial: required overlap of features (genes), but cells do not overlap. Cell type prediction for seqFISH data was performed based on scRNA-seq (known) [credit: Amrit Singh / Kris S]
B) scProteomics: a small number of features overlap (proteins) but patients and cells do not overlap. Data imputation (?), spatial co-localization or cell type prediction was performed   [credit: Lauren Hsu and Pratheepan Jenagan / Kris S]
C) scNMT-seq: cells are matching across assays but features do not overlap. Data integration was performed [credit: Al Abadi / Kris S]
D) Nor cells nor features are matching  [credit: Chen Meng / Kris S]](images/summary_fig_person.png){@fig:common width="50%"}

### Summary and commonalities of analysis approaches for multi-omics datasets identified through the hackathon

**Elana - summary paragraph would be useful here, ending with a transition to lead into the interpretation section**

Table: Different methods were used in the hackathon. * indicates the method was not applied on the hackathon data. For some common challenges, ‘bulk’ indicates the method was originally developed for bulk omics, 'sc’ indicates the method was specifically developed specifically for single cell data **table will include links to vignettes** {#tbl:common}

<style type="text/css">
  .tg {
    border-collapse: collapse;
    border-spacing: 0;
    background-color: #ffffff;
    color: #333333;
  }
  .tg td {
    border-color: black;
    border-style: solid;
    border-width: 1px;
    overflow: hidden;
    padding: 10px 5px;
    word-break: normal;
    text-align: left;
    vertical-align: top
  }
  .tg th {
    border-color: black;
    border-style: solid;
    border-width: 1px;
    overflow: hidden;
    padding: 10px 5px;
    word-break: normal;
    text-align: left;
    vertical-align: top
    font-weight: bold;
  }
  .tg .tg-bold {
    font-weight: bold;
  }
</style>
<table class="tg">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Common challenges</th>
      <th>Tasks</th>
      <th>sc Spatial</th>
      <th>sc targeted proteomics</th>
      <th>sc NMT-seq</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold">Pre-processing</td>
      <td class="tg-bold">Normalization & data transformation</td>
      <td>Data distribution checks (Coullomb, Singh)<br>
        High Variable Genes selection (Xu)
      </td>
      <td>Variance Stabilization Normalisation [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/18.suppl_1.s96] (Meng)<br>
        Arcsinh transformation (Jeganathan).<br>
        Inverse transformation (Jenagan)<br>
        Selection of patients (Jenagan)
      </td>
      <td>Summaries of DNA measurements (input data provided in hackathon)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold" rowspan="6">Overlap</td>
      <td><b>Cell overlap</b><br>
        (features not matching)
      </td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>
        <b>Dimension reduction and projection methods:</b><br>
        LIGER [@doi:10.1101/459891] (Welch) (sc)<br>
        sGCCA [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxu001] (Abadi) (bulk)<br>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <b>Partial feature overlap</b><br>
        (cells not matching)
      </td>
      <td></td>
      <td>
        <b>Imputation:</b><br>
        Direct inversion with latent variables (Sankaran)<br>
        Optimal transport to predict protein expression (Lin)<br>
        K Nearest Neighbor averaging (Jenathan*)</span><br>
        <br>
        <b>No imputation:</b><br>
        Biological Network Interaction (Foster*)
      </td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><b>Partial cell overlap</b><br>
        (features not matching)
      </td>
      <td></td>
      <td>Multi block PCA [@doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.mogsa] (Meng*)</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><b>No cell overlap</b><br>
        (complete feature overlap)
      </td>
      <td>Averaging nearest neighbors in latent space to impute unmeasured expression values (Coullomb?)</td>
      <td>Transfer cell type label with Random Forest (Hsu)</td>
      <td>LIGER [@doi:10.1101/459891] (Welch)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><b>No cell overlap</b><br>
        (partial feature overlap)
      </td>
      <td></td>
      <td>
        Topic modeling to predict cell spatial co-location or spatial expression (Jenathan, partial feature overlap)<br>
      </td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold">No overlap</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>RLQ [@doi:10.1890/13-0196.1] (Chen*)</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold">
        Managing differences in scale<br>
      </td>
      <td class="tg-bold">
        Data integration
      </td>
      <td>
        LIGER [@doi:10.1101/459891] (Sodicoff) (sc)<br>
        ComBat (Singh)<br>
        Projection methods MFA, sGCCA [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxu001] (Singh*) (bulk)<br>
        UMAP/tSNE (Sodicoff) (sc)
      </td>
      <td>
        Multi-block PCA [@doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.mogsa]<br>
        Weighting matrices based on their similarities: STATIS, MFA (Chen*)(bulk)<br>
        Scale MIBI-TOF to the range of CyTOF values (Jenagan)
      </td>
      <td>
        LIGER [@doi:10.1101/459891] (Welch) (sc)<br>
        Projection method sGCCA [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxu001] (Abadi) (bulk)<br>
        Multi Omics Supervised Integrative Clustering with weights (Arora) (bulk)
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold" rowspan="2">
        Generic approaches
      </td>
      <td class="tg-bold">
        Classification &amp; feature selection
      </td>
      <td>
        Backward selection with SVM (Coullomb)<br>
        self training ENet (Singh)<br>
        Balanced error rate (Coullomb, Singh)<br>
        Recursive Feature Elimination (Xu)<br>
        <br>
        (all bulk)</span>
      </td>
      <td></td>
      <td>
        Multi Omics Supervised Integrative Clustering (Arora) (bulk)<br>
        Lasso penalization in regression-type models (bulk)
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold">Cell type prediction</td>
      <td>Projection with LIGER [@doi:10.1101/459891] (Sodicoff)<br>
        SVM (Coullomb, Xu)<br>
        ssEnet (Singh)<br>
        (all bulk)
      </td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold">Study specific approaches</td>
      <td class="tg-bold">Spatial analysis</td>
      <td>Hidden Markov random field<br>
        Voronoi tesselation (Coullomb) (bulk)
      </td>
      <td>Spatial autocorrelation with Moran's Index (Hsu, Lin)<br>
        <br>
        Selection of spatial discriminative features:<br>
        Moran's Index, NN correlation, Cell type, interaction composition, L function (Lin)<br>
        <br>
        (all bulk?)</span>
      </td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-bold">Inclusion of additional information</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>Survival prediction: Cox regression based on spatial features (Lin)</span></td>
      <td>Include annotated hypersensitive sites index to anchor new/unseen data from DNase-seq, (sc)ATAC-seq, scNMT-seq, for <em>de novo</em> peak calling (Meuleman*) (bulk)
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
