## Software strategies to enable analyses of multimodal single cell experiments

### Key questions 

* How should multimodal single cell data be managed for interactive and batch analyses?
* What methods will help software developers create scalable solutions for multimodal single cell analysis?
* How can we ensure that visualization methods that are central to multimodal single cell analysis
are usable by researchers with visual impairments?

### Data management strategies

* Abstract data type: "multiassay experiment".  This reflects the idea that each mode will
be characterized by a different collection of features on possibly non-overlapping collections
of samples.  The metadata on features should be clearly and conventionally defined.  For example,
genes and transcripts are enumerated using Ensembl catalog identifiers; regions of accessibility
are defined using genomic coordinates in a clearly specified reference build.  Metadata on
samples must include all relevant information on experimental conditions such as treatment,
protocol, and date of technical processing.
* Serializations and data access methods for
    * spatial transcriptomics
    * scNMT-seq ...


### Scalability strategies

### Reducing barriers to interpretable visualizations

### Details of working components

|Type|Brief name|Description|URL|Author email|
|----|----------|-----------|---|------------|
|R data class|MultiAssayExperiment|unify multiple experiments|bioconductor.org|many|
|R package|Giotto|Spatial transcriptomics|...|...|
|python library|PyTorch|deep learning|...|...|

